maybe can't welcome with a big question
so they were back at Brunel University
London in Oxbridge to debate one very
big question is digital media good for
democracy welcome everybody to the big
questions
now this Friday Donald Trump will be
sworn in as the 45th President of the
United States of America many say he
knows his victory to a greater mastery
of the tools of this digital age Twitter
Facebook and all the other forms of
online communication and US intelligence
agencies are saying that Russian
intervention in cyberspace played a hand
too well here in Britain the brexit
campaign was acknowledged to be far
Savia in its use of social media than
the remain site the Scottish
nationalists online army narrow the gap
in their independence referendum and
helped drive out labour in the 2015
general election so there's no denying
the power of digital media but it also
poses a real challenge how do you know
what's true what's fake in an online
world with no editorial control or
standards and what is the effect on
democracy of trolling fake news and the
echo chambers created by algorithms to
debate this brave new world we've
assembled a digitally savvy front row of
journalists politicians campaign
advisers techno Wizards think two
heavyweights television executives
learners academics all here in the flesh
not created in some virtual world they
are all too real and you can join in on
Twitter or online by logging on to BBC
code at UK slash the big questions
follow the link to the online discussion
lots of engagement contributions from
our highly representative Oxbridge
audience as well well I'm Jamie Bartlett
AF I'm a director at the Center for the
analysis of social media a very man this
has changed politics forever hasn't it
for years we've been saying how do we
get young people how do we get more
people engaged how do we stop them from
being disenfranchised we have done just
that
it has got a lot more people engaged
there's no doubt about that and it's not
just people tweeting and posting things
on Facebook social media has been
remarkably good at forming a bridge to
get people into real world politics as
well various types of activism marching
demonstrating even voting I think if
people are more likely to vote if they
get involved in politics online all good
that is all good and I think everybody
here would acknowledge that's a very
good thing but of course it creates new
problems and those problems I think
we're only just beginning to grapple
with I think it's making politics in
some ways far more polarized far more
difficult to predict or control in many
ways Donald Trump is the perfect
politician for a digital age we are
overwhelmed with information and graphs
and charts and infographics and tweets
and retweets and in those circumstances
we tend to go for whatever is the
loudest the most offensive the most
emotive and that is why politics I think
it's becoming more polarized it's
creating more centers of power that we
barely understand huge tech companies
that can control what we see online and
we don't really know how they work so
while it's bringing more people into
politics it's not clear to me yet
whether it's making politics any better
in fact in some ways it's making it
rather worse well there's loads of
issues there I'm really looking forward
to the next hour or so Helen he makes
some good points are people actually
becoming better informed and more
engaged because a click of a mouse is
one thing but actually trudging up the
stairwells of high-rises delivering
leaflets on a cold February night is
another thing entirely I don't think we
should denigrate the click of the mouse
I think there's a there's a culture
particulate expert ich Yule early
British politics that politics must be
painful you've got to do something cold
or long or boring or hard work and what
digital media have done is they've sort
of democratized the acts of political
participation so now there's very small
acts of participation liking something
clicking something indeed the click of
the mouse which is which is what's doing
the work here it's what's drawing people
into
we should let go of that even while
we're kind of lame denigrate the quick
yeah and it makes a difference people
feel they're making a difference yeah
are they they're only they're only
because of these algorithms which send
you your own things that they think you
will like so you basically it's that
echo chamber it's that bubble people
talk about you're only confronting if
that's the right word your own opinions
there's no challenge I don't think
that's right I mean the true echo
chamber would be just reading the Daily
Mail in the 1930s or just watching one
particular TV station in the u.s. that
would be a real echo chamber and I don't
think that the of course our our social
media environments are personalized by
us and personalized by the social media
platforms and we need to kind of work
against that but I do think still that
our kind of information environment in
this research to show this that people
are exposed to more news sources on
social media than people who don't use
only the news sources they agree with no
not necessarily a more heterogeneous
range of nuances on social media than
they are in the offline world we're very
good at creating echo chambers outside
social media and they don't think we
should forget that yeah echo chambers on
there's nothing new nothing oh is that
right well I think firstly I mean
Facebook's a bit different but Twitter I
think we over blow its importance
because only a very small section of
population are regularly using Twitter
to talk about the world around them and
they tend to be younger and more
affluent he's like the brexit the EU
referendum the people most likely to
vote to leave were people over the age
of 65 who were the least likely to be on
Twitter so I think if we're talking
about these grand political developments
sweeping the Western world and putting
it down to Twitter then I think we're
mistaken I think the danger with people
like me on the left of politics is we
think well the mainstream media's biased
against this most of the press supports
the Conservative government
so let's retreat to Twitter I think
that's a mistake because most people
they come home at the end of the day
busy day got jobs got kids they might
listen to better radio watch the evening
news maybe flip through a newspaper and
that is how most people still get their
news culture
false impression of what's happening in
the world in a sense rather because
Helens didn't get all this information
you're better informed than ever but in
fact you're saying there's something of
a political Mirage about it I think when
it comes to Twitter I think on Facebook
we've got look you've got someone here
who did an excellent job for the
Conservatives weren't often hear me
saying that about people on wouldn't get
British qualities but he did because
what they did with Facebook it wasn't
about joining Facebook groups which is
again just people often agree with each
other what the conservators did is they
targeted specific demographics because
millions of people use Facebook they're
not talking about politics again on
Facebook then clicking on photos sharing
funny messages with friends but they
targeted adverts at specific
demographics that is very effective but
if people like myself who are
campaigners think we can just send a few
tweets going or a Tereza may yeah a load
of people retweet that that we then we
make the mistake of thinking well the
rest of the country all of a sudden are
full of the same enthusiasm as me and
that's not true so Twitter has its use
it can mobilize campaigners put issues
on the agenda but it isn't the
substitute unfortunately for trying to
have a strategy to deal with yes very
hostile press there are formation Tom
Edmunds in a moment but Ellie want to
come in at this point yeah I think that
was a point made earlier that social
media which i think is a great new tool
it's just another kind of technological
advance in the way that people can
communicate with each other and that's
to be welcomed makes it politics harder
to control or makes politics more
polarized I think most of us myself
included would welcome that because
having more ability to have an argument
having more scope to have a debate and
have more people involved in the
conversation is always a positive
certainly - it is a very kind of close
shop in the way that it's mainly young
people and media commentators myself as
journalists know that and Facebook as
some as own said it's a bit different
but the idea that this should be what
what kind of frightens me more about
social media isn't necessarily who's on
it and who's talking about it is the
attempts to control it the intents to
make Facebook and social media and
Twitter put out certain messages will be
worried about what messages they're put
out and kind of the drive to censor
social media something that way so
fascinating area I'm going to address
that a little bit later on because we
all will have lots - must have focus on
there with the trolling with the vile
abuse with the fake news with the with
the false news and all that that's all
to come but you were mentioned
Tom in despatches by Owen Jones in a
congratulatory tone because of the
brilliant strategy that you came up with
for the Tories in the last election
online what did you do and how did you
do it
Oh broadly political policies use online
communications for two things it's the
first thing is to find and recruit
supporters who will go and take those
vital actions to support them primarily
offline as other panel members have
mentioned so it's people are going to go
knock on the doors because nothing beats
that face-to-face communication the
second thing they do and we did in 2015
campaign is to find and reach out to
those swing voters in their marginal
seats that can decide that election and
speaks them about the issues they care
about now if you imagine an election
campaign you're speaking from any one
films die versus live down voters in the
southwest to labour voters in the north
of England and in Scotland as well so
you need to speak to them about issues
they care about there what facebook
allows you to do is find those groups of
individuals and speak to them about the
issues you can't have to work quite hard
to find labour voters in Scotland
nowadays you so that's what you did very
very targeted very focused and very
successful very targeted very segmented
communications now digital in itself is
just a medium so you need to have the
message right before you go and speak to
these people there's no point finding
individual groups of people and speaking
about things they don't care about
there's no point finding groups of
people finding inclusive young voters
and then speaking to them about pensions
or about issues they don't care about so
it's about finding groups of people
having the right message and getting in
front of them the time and time again
hmm and it was Helen it was remarkably
successful in the marginals wasn't it
well it was and if you and I think also
very successful for the leave campaign
and brexit and very successful for Trump
because after all if you if you just
reach an echo chamber of people who
agree with you you're not going to make
any difference I mean that's not that's
not what parties are looking to do
they're looking to find people who are
undecided or don't know what they think
yet and what Labour did at the last
general elections you know better than
me is it just randomly throw out the
same message across Facebook so didn't
target specific people in
specific seats they needed to win over
and also they miss stock engagement
that's lots of people liking commenting
for success but actually what that
generally meant was the messages their
core supporters already agreed with like
the NHS we're getting lots of Attraction
but they weren't reaching out to the
people they needed to win over and
obviously that's what you learn from so
successfully you said I'm not good we're
not just gonna do things for likes or
clicks we're going to target the people
we need to win over who aren't in our
natural coalition yah-tchi as a Labour
MP just moving up I never so slightly
the digital media revolution it's a
great process and platform of
democratization isn't it isn't it a
great leveler before I came into
politics I was a electrical engineer for
twenty years helping build out these
networks and the reason why I went into
that is because anything something that
gives people the power to connect with
other people which enables people to
reach out to share that is progress and
that I believe is good for democracy but
like any technology
it comes with its disadvantages as well
and also any technology those in power
will try and use it to be force
reinforce their power and as they have
the most means they're the most likely
to be able to use it most effectively to
begin with but you don't have to you
know have lunch news Rupert Murdoch to
get your message out there anymore
because there are there are other ways
of doing it let me say there's two
really big caveats with that and the
first one and that's the reason why I
still do walk out on cold winters days
and knock on doors is because there were
millions of people in this country who
still don't have broadband who still
don't have any digital access you know
at the state of broadband in this
country is a disgrace and then there are
those who may have access but they can't
afford it it's too expensive or they
haven't got the digital skills necessary
to use it so there are millions of
people off away from this from this
debate that we really need to include
and when we have included them then we
need to look at the way in which that
debate and those messages are being put
out and what I would say particularly
about you know and I really I think it
was it wasn't as effective can
paying the Tory campaign in 2015 spent I
think it was as ten times more than
labor on Facebook but the other point is
that those messages came with adverts
downsides you know and when when I am
reaching out to my constituents and
Facebook enables me to do that and I do
use that but I'm very aware that if I'm
asking them about how they feel about
obesity or something there's gonna be
adverts for you know well-known fast
food places down one side and there's
going to be messages which are
calculated on the basis of algorithms
which are entirely you know invisible
entirely opaque would become known not a
job so what I would say is we are
destroying the system fails the system
feeds you with things that they know you
will like because of your your previous
clicking habit it's just just to
highlight that for people carry on yeah
so we need to we need to update you know
the regulations basically to make sure
this fantastic opportunity is fairer and
is accessible to people and is used to
support and enable people and not to
feed them the same message they're happy
the word regulations I think that I also
think we may be giving a bit too much
credit to social media in that the idea
that political messages put up by
parties simply failed because they
weren't using the right social media
strategy is perhaps masking a bigger
problem and perhaps they were putting
out the wrong messages are messages that
people weren't interested in and when
you brought up there the fact of adverts
being alongside things on Facebook and
there is this sense that people kind of
are just sort of mindlessly clicking on
something and then they kind of you know
pop up for McDonald's comes up and they
think oh yeah I want McDonald's and it's
that kind of mindless and that's very
insulting view of the public not only
how they engage with news but just
generalizing is vert izing for a reason
because it does actually work so so
that's what and that's where Facebook
gets its revenues from now I'm not
saying people are mindless but I'm
saying that people are influenced by
advertising otherwise you wouldn't have
said quite such a big but if you're
putting out a message on obesity let's
take your example and then you're saying
that
there's a link between that and then a
fast-food advertisement being alongside
that you're drawing is some kind of
relationship between them and when then
when you use the word regulation my
alarm bells go off because I think what
do you want to regulate in that
everything respect you I'm gonna count
you in a minute because that was quite a
round of applause nothing is above for
the Lord are you saying that the
internet should be above the law I mean
so there are regulations that exist now
you recognize that we have a legal
system yeah yeah nothing's above the law
so the law should apply yes but in terms
of great speech on the Internet it
should be absolute Oh free speech and
Internet that's gonna be a tasty area
for us later on that way sir you burst
into a raptures so low round of applause
there we expand on it I just agree with
the lady here I just think that it's
very easy and I think it's a correct you
know link between advertising on social
media and problems that we face in
society hmm now Jamie what about you
mentioned Trump I think earlier on what
was was Trump's campaign a triumph of
digital media in some ways yes I mean of
course there are much bigger trends
behind that you can just arrive and use
Twitter and Facebook and then suddenly
get yourself elected
you're obviously tapping into various
much deeper concerns that people have
but the point I want to make about that
is when you are completely overwhelmed
with different sources of information
this is the problem with social media we
were promised in the 1990s from the
digital prophets that the politicians of
the future when we were all connected
and we all had access to the world's
information we'll be more informed
they'd be smarter and we'd all be kinder
and nicer to each other
what a great academically we said it
would be the end of nationalism because
we'd be able to link to everybody and
we'd all understand each other this is
ludicrous the reality is of course that
when we're overwhelmed with information
we use heuristics to try to quickly
figure out what we think we do tend I
think I disagree slightly with you on
this Helen that we do tend to find
things that we already agree with that
our friends already agree with and we
trust that more
anyway we do that anyway but we do that
to such a greater extent now than we
ever did before and we're less aware of
it is that true Helen well it's I think
it's a tendency to present it as one
thing or the other I mean it's it's a
very gray area you know between I even
hear people talking about kind of
hermetically sealed echo chambers and
that's people say people say oh the
Twittersphere has gone mad what they
mean is their own Twitter feed has gone
but in almost any platform you'll be
able to see trending information and you
just you know just you're just one click
away from a huge array of opinions but
the danger is I think that social media
politics is in many ways more angry more
aggressive more emotive and the danger
and the danger of that I think is that
it makes compromise more difficult the
US Congress is more polarized than it's
ever been or since the war at the least
and I think that's happening in a lot of
different democracies and part of the
reason is the way that we do now most of
us not everyone but most of us engage
with politics that makes compromise more
difficult and I think that is going to
make politics much more difficult all
our societies have become more polarized
where you know people whether Trump in
the United States brexit here across
Europe the rise of the populist right
we've become far more divided as society
it's not obviously social media that's
cause that social media is amplifying
aspects of it though because people
communicate on social media in a way
they would often never dream of speaking
to each other in real life they often it
encourages a pack mentality where you do
get groups of people like the mob in the
French Revolution but they will get like
that because that does sound kind of
because it is good that they can be as
good you can democratize information
that lots of people because somebody
says something out for example on
Twitter and I was on holiday and I
looked online on them on the phone to
see what was having in the newspapers
number three stories are people who'd
said something on Twitter and it had the
fury poured upon them for doing so and
had to delete the tweets and had to
apologize and so it's that really good
for freedom of speech no that's not
because you do end up with a situation
now where basically people often if they
make a mistake or they say something
which is obviously quite inflammatory or
divisive then a group on
well basically coordinate and relish
taking that person down yeah and they
will throw everything at them and if you
in the middle of a Twitter storm John
Monson wrote an excellent book about
this yeah people shamed on Twitter
yesterday it can be a terrifying
experience where random strangers all
over the world are suddenly screaming at
you can be quite threatening and
menacing you even get a phenomenon
so-called daxing where people will
expose your personal information go
through your backstory everything
possible try to get me sacked by your
employer so it can be very menacing if
I'm the mainstream newspapers feed off
the back of it and have stories about
that very thing happening and people
being shamed for saying something that
some of the papers reporting on it I
should agree with yeah well I think
that's the other problem because this is
the other issue day because we look at
social media so this is a new phenomenon
but there's a very long history of our
very politicized media finding
individuals who they disagree with
hunting them down having reporters
outside their front doors going through
that private life go through the private
lives of people around them so yes we
should hold social media to account but
we should also hold to account our
mainstream media which is responsible
offer for disseminating false news for
targeting individuals they don't agree
with I'm humiliating them so yes let's
have that concern I think we should talk
about our press as well which is often
out of control itself okay okay that's
that's something we'll skip onto in just
a second is this good for freedom of
speech then if people feel intimidated
Jamie no I mean there is always a I
think there's a danger with socially and
I'm in favor of I think social media and
democracy work in some ways very well
together and I think the positives do
outweigh the negatives there is
definitely a sense though there are a
lot of people and I feel it myself
sometimes of self censoring fearing to
put something online than have it will I
be attacked for that is it the right
thing to do and just avoiding the
scandal avoiding the mob avoiding saying
something that might cause what did you
want to definitely well I did I might
get some retweets and you know views the
rest of it so but and that is a that is
the danger especially given that
anything that you post stays online
forever and so you might be called up
for something you did 10 years ago but
is then waved in front of you and you
lose your job or you have people
complaining about you and that's very
that has a real chilling effect because
people be afraid of
ever speaking their mind an tom is this
something you take into account when
you're employing people for example you
have to look at their Facebook history
and their absolutely and we notice
increasingly it for example if your
political party wants to use a real-life
case study for a film with party
political broadcast a poster campaign
it's virtually you would look into their
background and you find increasingly
when you look at people from a younger
generation when you look at their
Facebook feeds when you look at their
Twitter feeds they are saying stuff that
kids aged sixteen seventeen eighteen
sake which you know when I was sixteen
seventeen eighteen oh saying stupid
stuff as well or you find they will have
like something from uni loud or the loud
Bible or something like that which we
know that this is just part and parcel
of being young and being a bit stupid
and making mistakes as we've all done
but taken out of context suddenly it is
it blows up and becomes us now it's
written in stone exactly and I remember
a case of the supposed other than panel
to know details more but a Youth Police
Crime Commission I think she was in
Birmingham who had sort of put her head
above the parapet for a job thing yeah
yeah maybe put a head above the parapet
for a job and then the press wouldn't
over her tweets as as they are it's
their right to do and they found that
she says some stupid stuff as we've all
done in suddenly she became the number
one victim in the country the number one
criminal in the country put her face all
over the papers and she had to resign
now I'm not argue the rights or wrongs
about what she said but increasing now
the things we say when we're younger are
being held against us because it's a
permanent record of the life done you
want to come in I'll be with these
things are important but that I'd like
to get us onto fake news which i think
is a I think is a cancer in the system I
mean you know the information is the
lifeblood of democracy and fake news is
a terrible oh and so in fact news is
nothing new
well we've seen the rise of it well
we've really seen the rise of it on
social media in the u.s. we not had fake
news in the mainstream media's you know
the Pope supports Donald Trump Hillary
Clinton part of a pedophile ring I mean
these things are nonsense but they're
very serious nonsense and I think well
the thing is I think that what we you
know we've got an election coming up in
three years time there is some evidence
to suggest this have an impact on the
democratic process in America I think we
need to find ways of
thing that tide reaching these shores
over the next three years I person I
mean although I think that social media
and the Internet are fundamentally good
for democracy they disseminate
information they encourage participation
this fake news needs to be stamped out
but what think the responsibility for
that lies with social media companies
but what's the debt don't think they're
being responsible enough about it and I
think they need to be cooled out okay
are they tech platforms or other
publishers that's the clues in the title
of their social media platform I don't
know why they're saying they're not
media come on this fake news business
some of these fake news stories are so
blatantly ludicrous surely most people
must think of which is more insidious
that or some of the misreporting and
misrepresentation and distortions that
we've seen over the years from the
mainstream media which is more dangerous
well I think that they're both dangerous
so there's a big big difference between
those two worlds though which is that
particularly for television it's a much
more regulated world there are rules
there's a third party independent
regulator who can investigate complaints
the the the social media is the Wild
West it is absolutely the Wild West and
that's a problem but if back in 1984 Joe
and the miners strike a very divisive
moment in British history and there was
a infamous Battle of all grieve an
infamous battle right then in the in the
you know whole struggle and the BBC I'm
afraid to say at the time they put the
tape in a wrong direction
because originally as Liberty said the
human rights organization for police
riot the police had to pay compensation
and and they put it in a wrong direction
the BBC yet to apologize for
incidentally because and made it look
like the miners at attack the police the
other example infamously is Hillsborough
where the Sun newspaper spread false
news fake news about Liverpool fans with
absolutely horrendous consequences so we
should take on fake news to the media
but this happens every day on on Twitter
and the Twitter sphere of the digital
media of fake I think often it Moloch I
mean whether it be about immigrants
Muslims unemployed people benefit fraud
I think all of these are issues which
are either exaggerated or distorted
often as well by the mainstream press
which play into people's prejudices
where you end up for example with
disabled people who've been as disabled
charities have said
abused on the streets as a consequence
various obstacles often complain to
somebody with them as dancers with this
so-called mainstream media the MSM you
can complain again I theoretically this
redress isn't in theory but I'm afraid
to say often the way the media operates
in this country is that they often
behave still with impunity you'll get
Corrections on page 22 in a tiny little
box so yes obviously we take we should
take I'm not saying we shouldn't take it
seriously absolutely should do should do
that false news which is deliberately
fake in order to play into the
prejudices of very angry sections of the
population bill I just don't think
there's enough anger about this I'm
coming I'm coming - don't worry cuz I
just got lots on this and knows a lot
about it but will is a fact-checker not
only checking what people are saying be
like politicians be they journalists be
they lots of other people in public life
but also asking them to go and correct
the record but it's not just mischievous
this stuff it's malicious isn't it it's
deliberate and it's malicious it's not
for me to judge that it's for everyone
in this room to judge that if we're
concerned about the effect of
information on democracy we've got to
remember that we are democracy it is all
of us as voters who decide where the
digital media is going to be good for us
or bad for us I think the thing you've
got to look at is who has power and
aren't they using it fairly our people
who are in powerful positions using
information to mislead us and if so what
are we going to do about it and Owen is
right that there are lots of examples of
mainstream media outlets publishing
things that are clearly not true
in our experience before eventually
sorry I'm getting clobbered for it well
clobbers this stuff is relative clicks
isn't it and it's you know loving Club
and is putting it far too strongly
very few mainstream media outlets have
any kind of system where people get
clobbered for getting things right set
of rules there's a third party
independent regulator who police's that
you can complain to things are
investigated and ultimately if you were
a pure repeat offender you have your
license revoked
well a when did that loss happen in a
major but I made you mean it's almost
someone of the Jews
some of the news channels it's really
sail close to the wind and they get
called on this stuff by I get by the
regulator and they have to amend their
behavior and they do television as you
said it's the most regulated and it's
absolutely right that they have the
strongest kind of set of rules around
accuracy and greatest caution it's
nonetheless 4k so at least one of them
has the informal Slagle of never wrong
for long
we'll get it on the air as quickly as
possible and we'll correct if we need to
television and radio have very strong
rules newspapers which are highly
partisan don't have the same rules they
have a whole range of things
some of them will correct things very
quickly and very fairly when we ask them
to and some of them will simply ignore
corrections requests so there's a whole
range of stuff I want to check a fact
how long does it take to check a phone
usually about a day a day and around a
really solid fact check where you've
looked at all the sources you talk to
experts where you need to witness it's
been around the world twice in fact so
the thing that really matters isn't
actually whether media outlets get
things wrong once it's how often things
get repeated because that's very
powerful so if they do correct things
when we point it out or when someone
else points it out that can do a lot of
good but not a lot of them do it
consistently now let's talk about social
media for a minute because there are
kind of two things going on with so one
is that all of us can share whatever we
want with whoever we want and that's
amazing that's democracy writ large and
if you don't like the consequences then
change your voters is not all of us to
do a better job as voters the other is
people in positions of power be they
were social media companies or be they
the advertisers on social media using
that platform either fairly to the users
or unfairly now the thing we don't know
when the political parties spend
hundreds of thousands millions I don't
know
advertising is what they are saying and
to whom it has never ever been possible
before
to reach millions of people in this
country and have the other millions of
the people in the country not know you
couldn't take out a newspaper advert and
have the rest of us not see it so now we
have a whole set of political
advertising that is completely
unscrutinized
and that's the thing that I think we
should be maybe a bit worrying Danziger
is invisible
the rest I think it's the fact that it's
unscrutinized is dr. Andrew about trust
you can't in a minute I'll come back to
trust I'll come back to trust because
the trust me I will come back to it but
or I'll apologize but Andrew hasn't been
in yet if I man I know Laura I've got to
come see you I think everyone's had a
say and we'll have far more of a say but
Andrew journalism humanities in creative
industries that's your thing as a doctor
Andrew calico in this we're on false
news raw fake news now but in this it is
cacophony of calamy falsehood is the
truth dying well I think the idea that
democracy is threatened and truth is
destroyed by a bunch of spotty youth
from Macedonia it's just ludicrous and
equally reasonable is that the CIA of
all people complaining about state
agencies interfering in the business of
other sovereign nations I mean you
couldn't good thank you I think though
that I think some of my fellow panelists
are really trying to do the jigsaw by
just the first couple of pieces that
come to hand and I think really if we
take a step back and look at that
question it's kind of too early to tell
whether social media digital media very
good for democracy because we're not in
one we're not in a democracy we're in an
era of something like zombie politics if
I'm a it's a little bit like was it that
was it down shopping was it when asked
yes the French Revolution is it that any
so did it work it's too early to tell
yeah yes if it was done but it's a
little bit like well we're in an era of
zombie politics where the majority
population is no small by its absence
and professional politicians have been
like a kind of Medicine Show spooning
out what the majority population is
supposed to accept and you meant to just
take your medicine and if you don't take
it you're decried as being a deplorable
and guess what
in the last year major sections of that
population have said we're not going to
be the studio audience anymore we're
going to walk out on that scenario and
so with all due respect I think a lot of
people sitting around the inner circle
are indeed in the inner circle they're
in the bubble that we are the problem
that is that is rather far removed from
where most people are and most people
are not in any substantial sense engaged
in in politic but if this kind of
interpersonal details amounts to
political polarization it's just
ludicrous put your hand up in the
audience if you want to say something on
this and I'll get around you but if you
say that people have disillusioned with
politics because of a lack of trust we
are now playing around with this
platform which has stuff on it that we
cannot trust in there's a paradox
somewhere that isn't well yeah I mean
I'm particularly interested in this
question of you know rules and
regulations because the the most
regulated part of the media is
television it is and we've got this
diverse public service system in the UK
and that is policed by Ofcom and lo and
behold people's biggest source of news
in the UK at least is television and
it's also the most trusted social media
I mean at the moment is much much lower
both in terms of the amount number of
people that do access it for news but
also for its levels of trust that the
problem is that you've got those by the
way
your problem is you've got you got this
this issue of fake news and we have to
stamp it out before it gets bigger do
like it's not it's not too late but
there's no such thing as fake news and
not fake news and it's clear to
determine which is which I mean it's
such a big gray area between one and the
other and every sense there may be but
something has censorship already you
have to regulate everything we have to
bring up the elephant in the room here
and in which is that what no one wants
to admit is that the idea of the fear of
fake news is the fear of who is reading
that fake news and what will they do
with that information and essentially
when you say that there is a danger of
people being influenced by
News negatively you're making a
differentiation between you who can
understand that the news is fake and
kind of those vicars out there who can't
and that's a deal that's deeply
insulting things if you think fake news
should be stamped out who do you want to
stamp out and why should they be the
arbiters of church I just don't buy
exactly well I think that's complicated
and I know but I think it's bogus do you
have different you have different
systems within different media and you
know televisions heavily regulated in
stop television keep holding power to
account generally being extremely
accurate being diverse and being popular
about why why are you so worried that
people and I mean I don't know who
you're talking about when you're talking
about people who don't understand that a
wild story about Ed Miliband fixing
relationships with Hillary Clinton is
fake BuzzFeed's research showed that
there was more consumption of fake news
entering the u.s. election than true
news it's the question if someone if
something completely fake about you when
all over the world like someone claimed
you the head of a drug cartel something
to you obviously ridiculous but when all
around the world thousands P they don't
know you from Adam that any who you are
and your picture is they're calling you
the head of your car so you'd be like no
correction needed free speech they can
say well one well they won't he be
comfortable that but I would suppose I
would publicly say that that isn't the
case rich it would put it's the cost of
having a free societies people being
allowed to say whatever they want and
sometimes that being untrue sometimes
that being now you all it stamp out the
cost of it free I'm good I'm gonna take
that I'm gonna take that thought there
are people being able to say whatever
they want and we're gonna discuss it in
the context of the digital media but
first of all as promised what would you
like to say I want you to say was that
this particular issue about news weather
where they are coming from is not the
responsibility of one side it's the
responsibility of the receivers
us general public as well to find it out
where is it coming from if we can't get
to right to the bottom of it at least do
a little bit of research or
investigation of our own nowadays it's
not only TV as somebody said it's mostly
the free newspapers on the train that's
the
time we have to just listen and edges
now this even if we take simple rules
golden rules now this particular rule
and saying is coming from a Muslim
community is a saying of Prophet
Mohammed Salim a basic saying a Hadees
that for a person to be a liar is enough
that he passes on whatever he just his
without making any effort to check so if
everybody takes just a simple basic rule
only we will avoid so much of spreading
around just a news which we heard on a
word say assume was their city yes
against rumors in backbiting everybody
sticks to their truth so much so much
will be relieved isn't it yeah a really
smart point and it's a really good point
so far you know as a fact checker it's
lovely to find may say to use
fact-checking to empower everybody but
thing you've got to ask the flipside of
the question of you know who's the
person who can you know split the
difference between all of those stupid
people who believe all that they can use
and the rest of us actually none of us
can just skim through a set of headlines
and know which of them is true or not
it's immensely difficult to spot people
who are trying to mislead you and people
who are we want to be things we like the
rills in the spills and the excitement
of all what what if that's true that's
great exactly it's a completely
different set of personal standards we
apply to that than we do to watching TV
news or radio news but you can't never
mind splitting the difference here's
somebody who made a difference Laura
your campaign and the tampon tax and
that was through social media wasn't it
yeah and yeah I think one of the main
really good points about social media is
that it really gives power to
underrepresented communities for people
like women for example so like tampon
tax have existed since 1973 and people
have campaigned for generations to end
tampon tax and the reason why this
campaign finally won at least I think
anyway is because we've had this
platform of social media that we've
never had before and upon that platform
we can finally really be heard and like
politicians can't necessarily ignore us
anymore
and so I think that's one really really
good like an important point of social
media that individuals can really use it
rather than like political parties or
maybe like news outlets like it gives
the individual
and then communities that are under
represented power yeah there's loads of
examples things I'm interested in the
whole pressure on SeaWorld in Florida
with your campaign yeah manic campaign
your campaign but it's not just a click
isn't it because it's what you were
saying no they don't Helen it's a
million clicks
scale up just nothing really significant
also like people don't just click and
then do nothing else or they don't just
like go through exactly and people don't
just scroll through like changed or
example and just like click on every
single petition they don't I get people
emailing me every single day with that
little spelling errors that I've made
that I've not even seen so they
definitely do like read through your
campaigns and we also have lots of
communities throughout the world really
and that have found together and really
made a difference within their community
whether that be through tampon tax or
the new campaign about homeless people
and improving sanitary provision to
homeless women like lots of people do
stuff physically that's inspired did you
get any abuse and vile trolling as a
result of your campaign I did I think
like especially as a woman or like a
feminist campaign you know online and
you just opened to that which is really
sad but like I found that online
trolling is actually really important
form of sexism that I mean like in
current way in that it's really
obviously documented and it's evidence
to show that like sexism really does
exist shock and it's yeah it shocks
people but like women face X is upon
everyday basis no lots of people
basically say Oh sexism doesn't exist
like we have never experienced as men
for example for therefore some of that
stuff is psychotic it's not yeah but I
mean it's just evidence of feelings that
are like evident throughout Society and
if that comes out online that's in a way
a good thing because it shows that
sexism you discus and when it's tackle
it it's lifted up the stone what about
so many female MPs have from all sides
of the of the chamber of the political
divide I've had some and it's not about
what's going on I think it's about
they're in a suit that's the power of
the network that you're talking about
with a tampon tax you know in networks
before were all boys network so they
were further powerful whereas now we can
have networks for for everyone good to
come together but as well as that that
attracts and
what the internet does really well is
amplify what is in people's what was out
there in the debate so it tracks those
who are the most vocal and the most
aggressive to take part in the debate
and what I really dislike I know about
you is this idea that if you respond to
that you are feeding the trolls you know
I think that women have to have women
and everyone needs to put their voices
out there and we need to take back that
space we need to take back the internet
space and what I would what I would say
is that again you know to come that's
why we need a more active government
setting we need it's too early to tell I
agree what the impact of digital media
and democracy but we need to decide what
that impact is what active government
what do you mean we need we need a
government where example is looking at
this the issue is protecting free speech
but also against hate speech online for
example if you meet one of these people
are very often out oh and you know
they're not very impressive human beings
some of these people are pretty sad
individuals think but they're you know
they become these sort of keyboard
warriors and as Owen said oh they're
only say things to you that were they
would never say to your face that's not
representative it's just brought out a
sense of its empowered its rather
pathetic people well I'm it's empowered
if you like the wrong people but there
needs to also be sanctions it needs to
be sanctions and this is the point about
internet it's in part of the wrong
people the wrong people when they're
attacking and trolling yes and there
needs to be sanctions and I'm very
interested the idea that you don't that
you don't believe there should be
sanctions online for the sort of
behavior which in the streets if
somebody attacked me in the street and
the way they do online there would be
sanctions and what I'm saying is a
regulation that applies in real life
applies also online I said I don't think
there should be any such foreigner on
the beach in real life or any wasn't you
know that the phrase empowering wrong
people is so terrifying to hear from an
MP I mean that is just shocking to me
because what this is really masking and
the in the question about women is so
interesting because so often censorship
online is couched in terms of protecting
women protecting minorities and what
that basically is saying is that women
cannot
really sometimes quite awful abuse
online as well as men to me that's tops
without putting their head above the
parapet wanted to stand apart if you are
public bigger and if you if you're a
publicly special MP you should be able
to accept that you are talking to the
public and the public should be allowed
to talk to you now sometimes that's
particularly nasty actually the majority
of so-called sexist abuse that MPs get
and I'm thinking about certain MPs who
were very vocal about it just that it's
about Cooper is actually just criticism
of this hang on if so they cancel and
Regency surgery and said I think you
should I would I think you should be
raped
you wouldn't say hang on a minute I'll
be with you in just a second threats and
things like that are clearly illegal it
should be dealt with through law but
what we're really talking about now is a
broader question about what is that and
actually what is talked about is saying
stuff like I mean you know I've written
on this a lot about what is sexist
trolling and it's often like calling
women fat or calling what saying
horrible things about women and that is
that is seen to say that women are too
sorry to say so women are more subject
to online abuse and that there should be
sanctions to protect women is deeply
more sexist than anything in online
coach how do we stop this can we stop it
should we stop I can't stop here and we
shouldn't stop all types of trolling and
we shouldn't stop all types of offensive
language or behavior because when we
live in a society is and we talked about
it where people are slightly worried
about self censoring not being able to
speak their mind actually sometimes
internet trolls play quite a valuable
role they push at the boundaries of
offensiveness and they make other people
feel like they might be able to speak
their mind to yes of course there are
limits to that where it gets
particularly targeted or where it's a
threat against an individual but there's
always a danger I think that with
internet trolls we just say oh there was
you know a terrible ghost silence and
all that would actually be quite
detrimental for the health of our
tomorrow you can play I think trolls and
abuse and that's the flaw I get trolled
all the time right I look like a 12 year
old I mean some age better than others
what can you do in article
it was provocative but it was pretty as
most of your articles can be pretty
thoughtful and and well argued about the
fact that having Jeremy Corbyn as leader
might not be the best idea in the world
and it was interesting and I I watched
it happen now is it unfolded in front of
me like a like a fight in the schoolyard
you weren't behaving in that manner but
other people were arriving sellout as my
mom would tell me no I'm joking there's
not much room for civilized debate so no
but I would say this actually because
yes I have had that kind of attack and
it seems ridiculous but I think we've
had a lot of focus on that but but the
vast majority of abuse I get is from the
far right and the hard right and that is
stuff like threats of violence that's a
death sharing my home address sharing
pictures from Google Street view of my
bedroom and my front door with arrows
pointing at them saying here's where he
his bedroom his his door now if you're
saying an absolute view on free speech
which is people have the right to say
that I should be chopped up because I'm
gay that people online should you know
it doesn't I don't take it seriously I
should say some of my friends think I
should take it far more seriously than I
do but nonetheless that in the in the
interests of free speech people can
basically issue whatever I do about it
and hate well it should be well over to
you in the real world if someone says to
you should you know your very real world
it is the real world online of course it
is I have to say after the death of Joe
Cox by far right terrible we should take
far more seriously the sort of hate
speech we see online and it legitimizes
often the sorts of extremism that can
end video that's where there's a fella
I'm drew so I don't think it necessarily
ends up in the tragic death of Joe Cox
which was not through a kind of social
media hate campaign that was not the
what happened it's not what I said that
tragedy well but the thing is what you
know the left used to be about
protecting people's freedoms and arguing
for people's freedoms and right now I
mean a lot of the kind of trolling
online comes from as we've said sort of
yes right-wing Sadow's who are keyboard
warriors and they really wouldn't
threaten a mouse let alone you know
women or any left-wing side those as
well as I can for the social people see
impartiality it comes from it comes from
both sides but we used to
on the left we used to argue for freedom
and absolute freedom and the freedom for
somebody to be able to say and express
themselves in any way and that's
actually now the biggest kind of
argument against free speech which is an
absolute right in a free society if you
don't have free speech you don't have a
course or any kind of freedoms because
it's the fundamental right to say what
you believe and the left is now trying
to close that down for through sound
andrew Williamson's and through dr.
andrew cole cut is this is this just a
necessary or unavoidable consequence of
the digital media platforms is it just
an a manifestation of aspects of the
human condition or is it something that
we should stamp on oh I certainly don't
think we should be stamping and
regulating things out of existence not
by any means and I I think it would just
be ludicrous to try and close it down
and sanitize it and outlaw the
deplorable zhh
it's you know this the same kind of
Hillary Clinton discourse all over again
you shouldn't be allowed to say that we
don't want you even in the echo chamber
but what Andrew what about and this is
something we'll come back to dump is Dan
mentioned this earlier on I think
somebody else did too seems an awful
long time ago Facebook and Twitter are
they tech platforms or are they
publishers well they're something like
your hybrid in between the two but you
know I don't think they are either the
problem all the solution
I think we've lived through decades of
intense into personalization
privatization of everyday life mixed in
with a kind of post political managerial
elite that wants to micromanage every
aspect of our existence including what
we do on online and I don't think
anyone's a mean I would imagine cuz
you're not because it's revealing that
you don't want a society of free speech
in this country and I believe
a total and utter free-for-all ignores
the fact that there are other aspects of
existence that also have importance
we're not talking about micromanaging
that out of existence we're just talking
about having creating an environment
where there's some basic decent creating
an environment means managing it one of
the originally have that incarnation of
these already have that media Electronic
Frontier Foundation which saw it as a
frontier for experimentation and people
breaking wait a minute everybody please
or I'll unfollow you all as a as a as a
TV man as a channel for man are you not
slightly on the defensive here because
you're old news and this is all this is
all the next this is what's happening
now that's gonna happen because the TV
News Channel 4 News great program Sky
News they do wonderful job BBC a IT and
likewise but don't they all look a
little bit letting footed no I don't
think that's right actually I mean I
don't think that is a sort of view of it
what is actually happening so and as I
said earlier television is the main
source of news for most people but the
traditional media companies Channel four
included the BBC included have done an
incredible job of going into the new
world and distributing video based news
you know travel news is now the biggest
British broadcaster putting news into
into Facebook but I think you've done a
deplorable job I'm telling the story of
what's been going on in Western
societies for the last twenty thirty
years that's why you didn't get that
people who were gonna vote for brexit
that's why the mainstream media didn't
get that people were gonna vote as much
as when covered the story I think you
just to complete on that point I think
the important thing to say about the old
media going into the new media space is
that we the BBC the other public service
broadcasters we we apply the standards
that exist in the television world which
are much higher and in the UK or the
gold standard in the world in any form
of media we apply those standards into a
world where other people
aren't applying it that's not to say the
internet only players don't have
terrifically high standard some of them
do people often pose I think you very
many open medals you don't dislike there
are many self-service broadcasting right
there are many who don't and is on fire
now well interesting points though
interesting about self service
broadcasting that's so that's quite a
fact
Jamie you've been listening you know you
know about this stuff
well the reality is I think that the one
I saw in the back
well it's getting far more unstable and
unpredictable and that's also very
exciting and we definitely need to
reinvigorate our democracies we need new
ideas to be new controls the more what
about Facebook what about Twitter aren't
that are their publishers essentially
aren't they shouldn't they be doing more
if they are judged as publishers I mean
they have an opt-out under a 1995
legislation in the US which means
they're not responsible for things that
are published on their platform because
if they were they would probably
collapse immediately because they'd have
to check everything before it was posted
and we're talking about millions
billions of you could go on right now
you could not suck if I do is you
can find vile Islamism you can find a
file not using the confession not
possible to actually check everything
all the time they have a moral
imperative to do significantly more than
they are doing that moment they are they
have immense power as companies and they
are simply not well exercised ability
I think we're mixing up two things or
down really with respect I think you're
mixing up two things one is that we all
know as individuals around social media
and what we do as individuals is our
business and everyone else can mind
theirs there are also lots of people
publishing on social media who are
organizations who are doing what used to
be only the remit of proper journalists
with proper hopefully proper
journalistic standards and obviously as
a professional journalist who lives by
those standards you're offended to see
people purporting to do that and not
living up to those standards those are
the people you have a beef with and I
think we need to be with people who are
outright lying and also people who are
doing it for their own simply for their
own financial even get to play
Helen I haven't heard from you for a
while the point is that the social media
platforms are now to some extent kind of
institutions of democracy if you like I
mean there are where our democracies are
played out there where our campaigns a
place where our elections take place
where our governments act to the web the
president-elect is actually making
policy and but they've only been there
for about five years they've only been
around at all for ten and they've only
been kind of intertwined with our
political systems for five so I suppose
it's not surprising that we've got a lot
of institutional catch up to do but
there are things we can do and there are
things that being done I mean not enough
and it's too late cetera but we
shouldn't just throw our hands in the
air and give up Twitter and and we
shouldn't lump everything together we're
lumping together fake news trolls you
know you know the small the small very
small number of people who are
threatening to close down Twitter
entirely right now this is how this is a
this is a fantastic debate but aren't
there there is a an even more fantastic
debate about this debate happening right
now debate about politics is being
played out on social media as we speak
exactly but but the solutions to the
things are different as well the
solutions to fake news of things like
your organization and of what Facebook
have said they will do about fake news
both they themselves in terms of fake
jacking and allowing individual Pete's
social media users to report you know
and and the solutions are different for
trolls and they are different for all
the other things that we've been talking
about but they they are there are
possibilities out there and they are
being worked out there are even BOTS
being developed antibodies just to
explain to people who don't know what a
bot is well an automated Twitter account
for example there are there are
automated Twitter accounts that are out
there facing racism and attacking racism
or just trying to persuade racist trolls
of the error of their ways etc and some
of those things are being shown to work
so there are a lot of possibilities out
there but we can't just lump them all so
Chih we're getting towards the end but
is it we've got about a forty second
answer from you field which we would is
this I do celebrate this
is it a better form of contact with your
constituents as a an elected
representative I celebrate it as an
elected representative in terms of being
able instantly almost to see some
constituents those who are on Twitter or
those are on either on Facebook's
response to really important issues that
is fantastic
online but I also recognized that there
are so many who aren't making those
responses because a lot of people have
better things to do with their lives
then respond to their MPs online but
also and I think we haven't talked about
this the rules that Facebook and others
do in order to decide what you see
okay the algorithm they are what control
and after theirs goes we're all gonna
check our phones right